# More About Classes & Objects - Constructor Functions & Prototypes

In this course, you learn about:

- What Happens Behind The Scenes of Classes and Objects
- Constructor Functions (Without Classes)
- Prototype & Prototypical Inheritance

## Constructor Functions vs Classes

Consider:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();
person.greet(); // Hi, I am Hamid and I am 23 years old
```

You learend how to use fields and methods and constructors and etc. before. This is a **class**.

But what is `constructor function`? It caught your eye a lot and you worked with it a lot before; see the following snippet:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
  this.greet = function () {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  };
}

const person = new Person();
person.greet(); // Hi, I am Hamid and I am 23 years old
```

As you can see, we use `function` keyword. It looks like a function. This is a **constructor function**. If you see the previous snippet, you know how easy it is (**constructor functions**).

What happens when we delete the `new` keyword? Let's do this:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
  this.greet = function () {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  };
}

const person = Person();
person.greet(); // TypeError: Cannot read property 'greet' of undefined
```

Because this just calling (executing) the function (class), not `return` any method (field and etc.). When we use the `new` keyword in front of `className`, behind the scences, this class create an empty object named `this`, then it adds all properties to this empty object and then it return `this`. For example:

```js
function Person() {
  this = {...};
  return this;
}
```

**constructor function**: A function which we can call with `new`.

Different of constructor functions and classes:

|Constructor Functions|Classes|
|:-:|:-:|
|Blueprint for Objects|Blueprint for Objects|
|Properties & Methods|Properties & Methods|
|Can be called with `new`|Must be called with `new`|
|All properties and methods are enumerable|Methods are non-enumerable by default|
|Not in strict mode by default|Always in strict mode|

## Prototypes

First of all, you need to know **JavaScript uses Prototypical Inheritance**.

Every constructor function we build, has a special prototype property which is not added to the objects we create based on it, because it's not part of the function body. But property of that function object (functions are objects), that prototype is there by default. We can edit it, something we will do and it is then automatically assigned as a prorotype to the object which is created when we instantiate that constructor function.

Why does every object have a ptototype?

**Note**: Prototype Objects == **Fallback Objects**.

Let's see the following example:

```js
class Person {
  name;

  greet() {
    console.log("Yo guys and girls");
  }
}

const person = new Person();
person.greet(); // "Yo guys and girls"
```

Let's say we have a `person` object which has a `name` property and a `greet` method, then we have some code which calls `person.sayHello()`. Now clearly there is no `sayHello` method in this `person` object.

As we mentioned before, every object in **JavaScript** has a prototype and a prototype is bacically a connected object which is used as a **fallback object**.

This is the connected prototype to the `person` object and this prototype object might have a `sayHello` method; and if **JavaScript** tries to access a certain method or property and doesn't find it on an object, it automatically looks at the prototype object and looks for the property there. If it doesn't find it there, it looks at the prototype of the prototype (chained prototype), all the way until it reaches the end of that chain and didn't find that property or method anywhere; and in that case for a property, it would return `undefined` and for a method, it would `throw` an error.

**Note**: **JavaScript** automatically looks into the prototype of the object and searches for the property or method there. Consider:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  age = 23;

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();

console.log(person.toString()); // "[object Object]"

console.log(person);
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

See the last line of above code, `__proto__`. That's a special property, hence the strange name. It's not really a property you should use to assign a value to though, it would work but not really recommended. But it shows us what this so-called prototype of this object is.

In above example, if we don't find the `toString` method in this object itself, **JavaScript** will go to that prototype, So to this object and look into that (`__proto__`). If we expand `__proto__`, we dont see anything, for example:

```js
/*
__proto__:
  constructor: class Person
  greet: ƒ greet()
  __proto__: Object
  */
```

We see another object which has a constructor method (that's a `function`, so it's a constructor method). This also has a prototype and then **JavaScript** goes to that prototype, and here we have a more complex object and there for example, we see the `toString` method and a couple of other methods.

```js
/*
__proto__:
  constructor: class Person
  greet: ƒ greet()
  __proto__:
    constructor: ƒ Object()
    hasOwnProperty: ƒ hasOwnProperty()
    isPrototypeOf: ƒ isPrototypeOf()
    propertyIsEnumerable: ƒ propertyIsEnumerable()
    toLocaleString: ƒ toLocaleString()
    toString: ƒ toString() --------- this line we see `toString()` method
    valueOf: ƒ valueOf()
    __defineGetter__: ƒ __defineGetter__()
    __defineSetter__: ƒ __defineSetter__()
    __lookupGetter__: ƒ __lookupGetter__()
    __lookupSetter__: ƒ __lookupSetter__()
    get __proto__: ƒ __proto__()
    set __proto__: ƒ __proto__()
*/
```

We can see the object prototypes with `__proto__`, for example:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  age = 23;

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();

console.log(person.__proto__);
/*
{constructor: ƒ, greet: ƒ}
  constructor: class Person
  greet: ƒ greet()
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

**Warning**: `prototype` and `__proto__` are different. `__proto__` property exist on every object, like `function` object (which we use as a constructor function), objects we build with object literal, an object we build withe the help of the constructor function, an array, we have always have `__proto__`. Because this shows us the connected prototype.

`prototype` property does not exist on every object, it exist on `function` objects, because **JavaScript** is a **prototype-based** language.

But the result of `person.__proto__ == Person.prototype` is `true`:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  age = 23;

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();

console.log(person.__proto__ == Person.prototype); // true
console.log(person.__proto__ === Person.prototype); // true
```

**Note**: These are exactly the same objects, not copies.

Let's make a custom prototype (with constructor function):

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.prototype = {
  printAge() {
    console.log(this.age);
  },
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person); // { name: 'Hamid', age: 23 }
person.printAge(); // 23
```

The full output of `person` is:

```js
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__:
    printAge: ƒ printAge()
    __proto__: Object
*/
```

As you can see, `printAge` is here, it's great. But we don't recommend you to do this.

**Note**: `this` here points to the `Person` object (class).

If you use `person.__proto__`, your output is:

```js
console.log(person.__proto__); // { printAge: [Function: printAge] } --
/*
{printAge: ƒ}
printAge: ƒ printAge()
__proto__: Object
*/
```

Summary:

- `function Person() { .. }` is default prototype.
- `Person.prototype = { .. }` is manually assigned prototype.

Prototypes can be a confusing and tricky topic - that's why it's important to really understand them.

A prototype is an **object** (let's call it `P`) that is linked to another object (let's call it `O`) - it (the prototype object) kind of acts as a **fallback object** to which the other object (`O`) can reach out if you try to work with a property or method that's not defined on the object (`O`) itself.

**Every** object in **JavaScript** by default has such a **fallback object** (i.e. a prototype object) - more on that in the next title.

It can be especially confusing when we look at how you configure the prototype objects for **to be created** objects based on constructor functions (that is done via the `.prototype` property of the constructor function object). Consider this example:

```js
function User() {
  // ... // some logic, doesn't matter => configures which properties etc. user objects will have
}

User.prototype = { age: 30 }; // sets prototype object for "to be created" user objects, NOT for User function object
```

The `User` function here also has a prototype object of course (i.e. a connected fallback object) - **but that is not the object the `prototype` property points at**. Instead, you access the connected fallback / prototype object via the **special __proto__ property** which **every** object (remember, functions are objects) has.

The `prototype` property does something different: **It sets the prototype object new objects which you create with this `User` constructor function will have**. That means:

```js
function User() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
}

const userA = new User(); // new object
console.log(userA.__proto__ === User.prototype); // true
console.log(userA.__proto__ === User.__proto__); // false
```

## Working With Prototypes

Consider the following code:

```js
class AgedPerson {
  printAge() {
    console.log(this.age);
  }
}

class Person extends AgedPerson {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    super();
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();

person.printAge(); // 23
console.log(person.__proto__);
/*
AgedPerson {constructor: ƒ, greet: ƒ}
  constructor: class Person
  greet: ƒ greet()
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

See? Let's see the `constructor: class Person` and `greet: ƒ greet()`.

The reason for this double prototype structure, which class with `extends` creates here which clearly differ from what we get with our **constructor function** and just `Person` prototype will be explained a little bit later in this course.

So to say, we have to create an `AgedPerson` object first, so that this can be set as a `prototype` for the to be created object that's based on `Person` thereafter.

Let's do it with construture function:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.prototype = {
  printAge() {
    console.log(this.age);
  },
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person.__proto__);
/*
{printAge: ƒ}
printAge: ƒ printAge()
__proto__: Object
*/
```

We see that now the prototype is back to an object which has `__proto__` and `printAge` but not the constructor method. Well that happens because what we do here when we assign a new prototype is we replace the old default object which is assigned as a prototype with a new object.

A better approach therefore typically is to not replace it but instead, reach out to a prototype (`Person.prototype`) and dynamically add a new property or method by adding a `.` dot notation and then name of our property:

```js
Person.prototype.printAge = function () {
  console.log(this.age);
};
```

Let's see full code:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.prototype.printAge = function () {
  console.log(this.age);
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person.__proto__);
/*
{printAge: ƒ, constructor: ƒ}
  printAge: ƒ ()
  constructor: ƒ Person()
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

See here, we also now have an object which still ha this `constructor` method. This method here refers to this `function Person() { name..` constructor function.

You could create more objects of that type by saying `const person2 = new person.__proto__.constructor()`. You can use it (to make sense) if you don't have direct access to the original constructor function anymore. **More importantly**, this is how you typically want to edit the prototype so that you don't override the default one and hence you keep the constructor method, but instead you just add what you want to add.

## The Prototype Chain and the Global Object

In **JavaScript**, `Object` is constructor function. It's also global object that have static built-in properties or methods (`console.dir(Object)`). If you do `console.dir(Object)` you see bunch of properties and methods. These are all static methods (everthing you see here in the end are just static properties and static methods).

In the class we would call these properties and methods which you can call without instantiating an object based on constructor function static properties and static methods.

As you learned before, if we add a static property, this simply means that a property is added directly to our constructor function object. For example:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.describe = function () {
  console.log("Hey there!");
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person);
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

As you can see, there is no `describe` method in there. But if we do `console.dir(Person)`, we see the `describe` method. For example:

```js
console.dir(Person);
/*
ƒ Person()
  describe: ƒ ()      <----- this line
  arguments: null
  caller: null
  length: 0
  name: "Person"
  prototype: {constructor: ƒ}
  __proto__: ƒ ()
  [[FunctionLocation]]: VM41:1
  [[Scopes]]: Scopes[2]
*/
```

**Improtant**: The global `Object` itself is not the fallback object, the fallback prototype; all other objects can come back to in the end. For example, if we use `console.dir(Object)`, we see `length` method of the global object that have value of `1`. If we want to use it for `person` object, we will get `undefined`. For example:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.describe = function () {
  console.log("Hey there!");
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(Object.length); // 1
console.log(person.length); // undefiend
```

Because as we mentioned, this global object constructor function is not the fallback object of everything.

**Note**: The fallback value of all objects is `object.prototype`.

This is just configuring which default fallback is assigned to objects that are created based on the object constructor. Let's see the older example:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.prototype.printAge = function () {
  console.log(this.age);
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person.__proto__);
/*
{printAge: ƒ, constructor: ƒ}
  printAge: ƒ ()
  constructor: ƒ Person()
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

This fallback object here (`Person.prototype.printAge`) for the `Person` constructor function, this prototype you get here or any object you create on your own with the object literal notation (`{}`) by default always uses this global object constructor (`Object`).

So any object created with the object literal notation or the object created by **JavaScript**, automatically is a default prototype here (i.e. `Person.prototype.printAge`), will be based on global object constructor function (`Object`) and will therefore use this `Object.prototype` as its fallback value.

**Note**: Every object by default uses `Object.prototype` as its fallback value.

Now in case you're wondering, this prototype (`Object.prototype`) itself then has no other prototype. You will not find any `__proto__` method if you use `console.dir(Object)`, just a `getter` and a `setter`, but this won't do anything. It will basically just capture any interactions; because if you try to get the prototype of that base prototype of everything (`Object.prototype.__proto__`), you will get a `null`. So that's where the prototype chain ends, it ends at `Object.prototype`.

```js
console.dir(Object.prototype.__proto__); // null
```

We bring a table that describes the prototype chain (consider `breathe` method not exist):

||||||
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|||`function Person() { ... } / class Person { ... }`|||
|||`const p = new Person()`|||
|`p.breathe()`|<span style="color: orange">No?</span>|`p.__proto__.breathe()`|<span style="color: orange">No?</span>|`p.__proto__.__proto__.breathe()`|
|Defined in `Person` itself (i.e. set up in blueprint)?||Defined in `Person`’s prototype?||Defined in Person’s prototype’s prototype?|
|<span style="color: green">Yes?</span>||<span style="color: green">Yes?</span>||Continues till `Object.prototype`|

For example: If `p.breathe()` not exist (not defined), way of searching will change to `p.__proto__.breathe()`; if this method still not exists (not defined) in `Person`’s prototype, it searches for `p.__proto__.__proto__.breathe()`.

## Classes and Prototypes

As you know, it's really important to understand the difference between the `prototype` property on constructor function where you configure what will be added to objects that are created based on that constructor function; and the `__proto__` property which is available on every object, not just on constructor function or function object which in the end points to the prototype that has been assigned to this object (consider `Object.prototype.__proto__` code). So to the fallback object that has been assigned to that object, that is really important to understand and **that's the idea behind prototypes**.

## Methods in Classes and In Constructors

Consider the following code:

```js
class AgedPerson {
  printAge() {
    console.log(this.age);
  }
}

class Person extends AgedPerson {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    super();
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();
```

If we use `console.log(person);`, the result will be:

```js
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__: AgedPerson
    constructor: class Person
    greet: ƒ greet()
    __proto__: Object
*/
```

The interesting thing is that the `greet` method itself is not part of the `Person` object. This object only has the two properties (`name` and `age`) and `greet` method is not part of it. Instead the method is part of its prototype.

By adding the method to a prototype, it makes sure that when ever we create a new `Person` object, we use the same prototype fallback object. It's a little optimization which leads to less objects be created, which means less memory usage and of course less performance. Because creating objects costs performance (less performance impact).

For example, if we create a new `Person` object, they are both equal at `__proto__`, for example:

```js
class AgedPerson {
  printAge() {
    console.log(this.age);
  }
}

class Person extends AgedPerson {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    super();
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();
const person2 = new Person();

console.log(person.__proto__ === person2.__proto__); // true <--- this line
```

We can also use constructor function for these ways:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.prototype.greet = function () {
  console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person);
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__:
    greet: ƒ ()
    constructor: ƒ Person()
    __proto__: Object
*/
```

We can prove it to you that class and constructor function can be same, for example:

```js
// class
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const person = new Person();

console.log(person);
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__:
    constructor: class Person
    greet: ƒ greet()
    __proto__: Object
*/


// constructor function
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
}

Person.prototype.greet = function () {
  console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
};

const person = new Person();

console.log(person);
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__:
    greet: ƒ ()
    constructor: ƒ Person()
    __proto__: Object
*/
```

The final result is:

```js
// class
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__:
    constructor: class Person
    greet: ƒ greet()
    __proto__: Object
*/


// constructor function
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23}
  age: 23
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__:
    greet: ƒ ()
    constructor: ƒ Person()
    __proto__: Object
*/
```

- class `constructor`: class Person
- constructor function `constructor`: ƒ Person()

We can add `greet` method inside of constructor function or inside of class constructor like this:

```js
function Person() {
  this.name = "Hamid";
  this.age = 23;
  this.greet = function () {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  };
}

const person = new Person();
```

or

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
    this.greet = function () {
      console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
    };
  }
}

const person = new Person();
```

We use `greet` as a field and don't use the shorthand method (concise method) is class, because that method shorthand is the trigger for **JavaScript** to do that optimization. But instead, we use an `=` equal sign here (as a field) and then assign a function and it doesn't matter if it's an **arrow function** or a **function** created.

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet = function () {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  };
}

const person = new Person();
```

If you do that, if you create `greet` method like this, you can call it like before. But you will see the output of that object, `greet` is part of this object itself, and no longer part of the prototype and that means this function (right side of `greet` field) is indeed created for every instance of this object (every instance based on `Person` class).

```js
console.log(person);
/*
Person {name: "Hamid", age: 23, greet: ƒ}
  age: 23
  greet: ƒ ()
  name: "Hamid"
  __proto__: Object
*/
```

Now that means that we occupy more memory and a creation of such an object of course also costs some performance.

If we use the arrow function here, as you learned before, arrow function doesn't know `this` keyword. for example:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet = () => {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  };
}

const p = new Person();

const btn = document.getElementById("btn");
btn.addEventListener("click", p.greet); // "Hi, I am Hamid and I am 23 years old"
```

`this` is refer to `Person` class. If we use the shorthand method, we get an `undefiend`:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const p = new Person();

const btn = document.getElementById("btn");
btn.addEventListener("click", p.greet); // "Hi, I am  and I am undefined years old"
```

It's not work, because this will now refer to the button and not to the class, because of how event listeners work. But isntead, we can use `bind()` method here, for example:

```js
class Person {
  name = "Hamid";
  constructor() {
    this.age = 23;
  }

  greet() {
    console.log(`Hi, I am ${this.name} and I am ${this.age} years old`);
  }
}

const p = new Person();

const btn = document.getElementById("btn");
btn.addEventListener("click", p.greet.bind(p)); // "Hi, I am Hamid and I am 23 years old"
```

At the end, **shorthand method + `bind()` method** is preferable. Because `bind(p)` here takes a bit less performance typically than using **arrow function**.
