# More about DOM & Browser APIs

In this course, you will learn about:

- Attaching Data to Elements
- Working with Element Coordinates & Sizes
- Working with Templates & Dynamic Scripts
- `window.location`, `window.history` & `window.navigator`
- Working with Dates
- Working with Errors

## `data-` Special Attribute and `dataset`

What is `data-`? How can we use them? We know that you hear it for the first time. Consider:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">

<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
  <title>dataset</title>
  <script src="assets/scripts/app.js" defer></script>
</head>

<body>

  <ul>
    <li id="prj1" data-extra-info="Got lifetime access!" class="none">
      <button class="alt">More Info</button>
    </li>
  </ul>

</body>

</html>
```

As you can see, we bring you a simple html content. In this content, you see `data-extra-info` attribute in `li` tag. We can access it from **JavaScript** with `element.dataset` property. We can set any kind of data to it, for example:

```js
const btn = document.querySelector("button");
const li = document.getElementById("prj1");
dataset = () => {
  console.log(li.dataset);
};

btn.addEventListener("click", dataset);
/*
DOMStringMap {extraInfo: "Got lifetime access!"}
extraInfo: "Got lifetime access!"
__proto__: DOMStringMap
*/
```

We see the data that named `extraInfo`. **JavaScript** automatically convert `-` dash to camel-Case word.

**Note**: We can use whatever name we want for `data-` attributes, for example `data-whatever` or `data-hamid-alavi` and so on.

These `data-` attributes are (in HTML) all merged together in a `dataset` property.

We can also add this attribute in **JavaScript**, for example:

```js
const li = document.getElementById("prj1");

li.dataset.hamidAlavi = "My name";
/*
// HTML content
<li id="prj1" data-extra-info="Got lifetime access!" class="none" data-hamid-alavi="My name">
     <button class="alt">More Info</button>
</li>
*/
```

We added data with `element.dataset.dataName = "value"` (e.g. `li.dataset.hamidHamid = "My name";`).

We see the data that named `hamid-alavi`. **JavaScript** automatically add `-` add before UPPERCASE character and converts all words to lowercase.

## Getting Element Box Dimensions

We can get the element box dimensions by `$0.getBoundingClientRect()` method. As you learned before, `$0` is the last element which we selected in **Elements** tab in browser developer tools. Consider, we are selecting the button on any site:

1. First of all, we are going to browser developer tools.
2. Then we select an element (in **Elements** tab).
3. Finally we use this method.

```js
$0.getBoundingClientRect();
/*
DOMRect {x: 787.546875, y: 322.8125, width: 92.6875, height: 36, top: 322.8125, …}
bottom: 358.8125
height: 36
left: 787.546875
right: 880.234375
top: 322.8125
width: 92.6875
x: 787.546875
y: 322.8125
__proto__: DOMRect
*/
```

You need to understand that the browser basically renders the page in a two-dimensional coordinate system with an x-axis from left to right and a y-axis from top to buttom.

**Important**: It's not like a traditional coordinate system where the y-axis would go from buttom to top and x from left to right at the buttom, but instead, it's all starting in the **top left corner**; and that make sense if you consider how a web page is rendered. It's rendered from **top to buttom**, not built up from buttom to top.

In top-left corner, we have `0, 0`x and y axis. Let's talk about `DOMRect` properties:

- **x y**: This basically means that this box (button) which we selected has its top left corner at a position of `322.8125` pixels down and `787.546875` pixels from the left.

- **left right top buttom**: They are exactly the same as x and y, but if we change the margin of that box in the CSS file (or set a negative value), it would be different value from these four directions.

- **width and height**: `width` gives us the total width of the box. `height` gives us the height of the box.

## Working with Element Sizes and Positions

> offset

We can get more specialized data by diving into our DOM element with special properties. For example there is `$0.offsetTop`, `offsetTop` gives us the distance of the topmost point. `offsetTop` always is **relative to our document start, not the viewport** (i.e. it does not change upon scrolling). In last button (box) which we selected, this `offsetTop` value is `323`. We also have `$0.offsetLeft`.

> client

We also however have `$0.clientTop` and `$0.clientLeft`. Now that's a different thing as we can tell, where **offset** property gives us the outer positioning (the position of the box in the coordiante system), the **client** properties give us the inner positioning (without any border and potential scroll bars that might be rendered).

> offsetWidth and offsetHeight

We can get some of the sizes for that box (button), we can get the `$0.offsetWidth` and we can get the `$0.offsetHeight`, and that's the entire width and height of this (that) box (including all border and scroll bars).

> clientWidth and clientHeight

We also have `$0.clientWidth` and `$0.clientHeight` and that's again the inner width and height without borders and scroll bars.

> scroll

We have `$0.scrollHeight`, so this property is the entire height including the non-visible parts (because they're may scrolled out of view).

We also have another interesting value, `$0.scrollTop`. This property gives us information by how much we scroll that content in the box (if you scroll down the page or content, this value will be higher).

> window

One note about the entire document width, if we want to get that, we got two options; we can use `window.innerWidth` and `window.innerHeight` and that should give us the width and height inside of our window (without the developer tools, without the URL bar at the top and so on).

We also have two another properties, `document.documentElement.clientWidth` and `document.documentElement.clientHeight`. These values are more reliable, because they will deduct any visible scroll bars and give us the real width and height that is available.

> scrollTo()

`$0.scrollTo()` method takes two coordinates (x and y), where we can define how much we want to scroll to the left or right and how much we want to scroll to the top or buttom (if you set it to `scrollTo(0, 0)`, this will not be scrollable). We can also pass css (like `top`) property into it. For example, `element.scrollTo({top: 50, behavior: "smooth})`.

> scrollBy()

With `$0.scrollBy()` method, we tell **JavaScript** by how many pixels we want to scroll down. We can also pass css (like `top`) property into it. For example, `element.scrollBy({top: 50, behavior: "smooth})`.

> scrollIntoView({})

With `$0.scrollIntoView({})` method, we can pass css (like `bahavior`) property into it. For example,`element.scrollIntoView({behavior: "smooth"})`.

## Working with template Tags

If we want to add more HTML content by `element.innerHTML`, it would be cumbersome and make us confuse. Thankfully the web has a solution for this. We can use a special HTML tag in our HTML code to kind of setup such to be used HTML code which we don't want to render right from the start, but which we want to eventually use from inside of **JavaScript** code. For this, we can use a special tag, the `template` tag. (`<template></template>`). For eample:

```js
const tooltipTemplate = document.getElementById("tooltip");
const tooltipBody = document.importNode(tooltipTemplate.content, true);
tooltipBody.lastElementChild.textContent = this.text;
// tooltipBody.querySelector("p").textContent = this.text;
tooltipElement.append(tooltipBody);
```

## Loading Scripts Dynamically

There is another cool thing we can with **JavaScript** which many people wouldn't expect or which might be strange when you hear it the first time. We can also create and run a script with **JavaScript**. For example:

```js
const script = document.createElement("script");
script.textContent = "alert('Hello there')";
document.head.append(script);
```

This code is exactly like:

```html
<script>alert('Hello there')</script>
```

Instead of that, we can load scripts with special features, for example accessing the `src` or `defer` property. For example:

```js
const script = document.createElement("script");
script.src = "assets/scripts/test.js";
script.defer = true;
document.head.append(script);
```

For example, if you pass this constant to `addEventListener` (click event), this script file will be executed when button is pressed (you can see this levels (add script file) in developer tools at **Network** tab).

**Warning**: It's a powerful feature, but of course you want to do it with care, you should especially be careful when it comes to dynamically rendering user created scripts, because that opens you up to some attacks here and it is something we'll have a closer look at in the security. In the end, try to inject malicious code into your code. We'll cover it (security) in another courses.

## Working with Timers

There are some other nice features the browser exposes to us in **JavaScript** that also allow us to influence user experience. One of these cool features is the timer which we can set or actually two different kinds of timer as we can set in our **JavaScript** code. We can set a timer with the built-in `window.setTimeout()` method.

Under the hood, this exists on the `window` object, but as you learned, you can omit the `window` and just call anything on it like `setTimeout()`. Then, what is `setTimeout()` method?

It sets a timer. Now, `setTimeout()` takes two arguments, the **first** argument is a function which should be executed when the timer expired; this can be an anonymous function, both an arrow function or a normal function or of course we point at a function (like `addEventListener`). The **second** argument is then is the amount of time we want to give the timer. For example, `5000` means `5000` milliseconds. This timer should take until it then executes this method (`setTimeout(funcName, 1000)`).

When this timer is set, it will not pause our entire script execution, we will be able to click all buttons and have our script to work as expected.

Instead this is (`setTimeout(funcName, 1000)`) registered by the browser somewhere in the background. The browser manages the timer and also just registers that function should be called when the timer expired and then once the browser sees that the timer expired, it will come back to our script and execute this function for us. So it's important to understand that will not pause script execution. Instead the browser will manage all of that for us in such a way that our script can continue to run; it will not pause.

```js
// point at a function
const name = () => {
  console.log("Hamid");
};

setTimeout(name, 3000); // after three seconds, "Hamid"
```

or

```js
// arrow function
setTimeout(() => {
  console.log("Hamid");
}, 3000); // after three seconds, "Hamid"
```

or

```js
// normal function (anonymous)
setTimeout(function () {
  console.log("Hamid");
}, 3000); // after three seconds, "Hamid"
```

or

```js
// point at a function
const name = () => {
  console.log("Hamid");
};
const time = 3000;

setTimeout(name, time); // after three seconds, "Hamid"
```

So that's the first kind of timer we wanted to show you, this is a timer which runs once. Sometimes we also want to have a timer that runs on an interval, so that runs every three seconds, every five seconds, every 100 milliseconds, whatever we have; and we can do that too.

We can use `setInterval()`, an alternative to `setTimeout()` which does something different though.

Now, `setInterval()` takes two arguments, the **first** argument is a function which should be executed; again, this can be an anonymous function, both an arrow function or a normal function or of course we point at a function (like `addEventListener`). The **second** argument ( to `setInterval()`) then is the amount of time when this should be sent and it will be sent very x seconds or milliseconds. For example, if we entered `2000` here, this function here will execute every `2000` milliseconds (every 2 seconds). This timer should take until it then executes this method (`setTimeout(funcName, 1000)`).

```js
// point at a function
const name = () => {
  console.log("Hamid");
};

setInterval(name, 3000); // every three seconds, "Hamid"
```

or

```js
// arrow function
setInterval(() => {
  console.log("Hamid");
}, 3000); // every three seconds, "Hamid"
```

or

```js
// normal function (anonymous)
setInterval(function () {
  console.log("Hamid");
}, 3000); // every three seconds, "Hamid"
```

or

```js
// point at a function
const name = () => {
  console.log("Hamid");
};
const time = 3000;

setInterval(name, time); // every three seconds, "Hamid"
```

We can clear the timers by `clearTimeout()` and `clearInterval()` methods. For example:

```js
const btn = document.getElementById("btn");

const intervalId = setInterval(() => {
  console.log("Hamid");
}, 1000); // every second, "Hamid"

btn.addEventListener("click", () => {
  clearInterval(intervalId); // stop interval when button is pressed
});
```

or

```js
const intervalId = setInterval(() => {
  console.log("Hamid");
}, 1000); // every second, "Hamid"

setTimeout(() => {
  clearInterval(intervalId);
}, 5000); // stop interval after give seconds
```

**Note**: You can use `clearInterval()` for `setTimeout()`, but we recommend you to use the correct method. For example, `clearInterval()` for `setInterval()` and `clearTimeout()` for `setTimeout()` method.

## `window.location` Object

The `window.location` object naviages all thing in the page. They're (methods and properties) all related to our URL and the page we're on. `location` can be used to also navigate the user away.

> href assign

We can change the site location with `window.location.href = "https://google.com/";`. This exists on the `window` object, but as you learned, we can omit the `window` and just call anything on it like `location.href`. For example:

```js
location.href = "https://www.google.com/";
```

We can also use the `assign` method for this way, for example:

```js
location.assign("https://www.google.com/");
```

> replace

If we want to replace the current page to another page, we can use `replace()` method (no back button), for example:

```js
location.replace("https://www.google.com/");
```

> host origin

We can use `host` property; which tells us on which host this page is running. Since we (and you) serve this locally from the files, we got no host there. But if we are on some other page (like google.com), then we (you) will see that host actually gives us the domain here (e.g. `"www.google.com"`).

We can also use `origin` property; which is the full domain including the protocol was used (e.g. `"https://www.google.com"`).

> pathname

We can see the page path name with `pathname` property (e.g. `"/doodles/"`). This can be useful to find out where you are on the page in **JavaScript**.

## `window.history` Object

`location` and `history` kind of work together, `location` allows us to edit the brower history by navigating around or by replacing the page; `history` then allows us to interact with that history.

> back() forward()

We could call `history.back()` and be taken back to the page where we came form.

We also have `history.forward()` to go to the page we came from.

> length go()

We can also inspect the length of the history with `length` to find out how many steps the user did in this tab of the browser (how often you went forward to a new page essentially).

We can control and go to the specific history and go back x steps in history with `history.go()` method. For example: `history.go(6)`.

## `window.navigator` Object

Besides `location` and `history` objects, there also is the `navigator` object. This allows you to interact with the browser and the operation system (of course only in a limited way, **not unlimited access**).

For example, we have `userAgent` property. The `userAgent` property returns the value of any variable by the browser to the server. The value returned, contains information about the name, version and platform of the browser.

```js
navigator.userAgent; // "Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Linux x86_64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/85.0.4183.102 Safari/537.36"
```

- Parsing the `userAgent` String to Detect Browsers: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/navigator#Example_1_Browser_detect_and_return_a_string>

- Better Best-practice Browser Detection: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Browser_detection_using_the_user_agent>

We can also find our location with `geolocation.getCurrentPosition`:

```js
navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition((data) => {
  console.log(data); // something
});
```

## Working with Dates

There is a global constructor function, the `Date` object. For example, if you use `new Date()`, you will get all information about date (e.g. `Sat Sep 26 2020 20:09:00 GMT+0330 (Iran Standard Time)`).

If we store it in a constant, so on this stored object, we get a couple of methods. e.g. `const date = new Date()`.

- `date.getDate()`: To get the day in mounth.
- `date.getDay()`: To get the day in this week (of week).
- `date.getMonth()`: To get the month in year.
- `date.getFullYear()`: To get the full year.
- `date.toJSON()`: Convert date to JSON format.
- `date.getTime()`: Since the beginning of time is **JavaScript** land which is January 1st 1970. So since then, this is (this value) the time of milliseconds that has passed and this can sometimes be helpful for calculating differences and so on.

If you don't pass anything (i.e `Date()`), you get the current timestamp. But you can also pass in the string (or another `Date` object) to describe a date. Then **JavaScript** will do its best to pass this as a date. Consider:

```js
const date = new Date("04/8/20");
```

Now if we use `date` constant, **JavaScript** derived is `Wed Apr 08 2020 00:00:00 GMT+0430 (Iran Daylight Time)`.

We can also add/substract/multiply/divide two or more date objects, for example:

```js
const date = new Date();
const date2 = new Date("04/8/20");

console.log(date - date2); // 14854160012

console.log(date / 100 * 2 - 300); // 32022838900.24
```

Learn more about `Date` global object from: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date>

## Working with Errors

Besides the `Date` object, there's also on other built-in object; that's the `Error` object built into **JavaScript**.

We can create a custom error with `Error` constructor function (object), for example:

```js
new Error("Somthing went wrong!"); // Error: Somthing went wrong!
```

We can also throw an error with `throw` keyword, for example:

```js
throw "Somthing went wrong!"; // Uncaught Somthing went wrong!
```

Yoy might want to consider throwing an error object using this dedicated `Error` constructor function. When you do so, you don't just get your message which is automatically put into a message property of the created object. You also get a stack trace which basically tells you where this error was thrown. i.e:

<span style="background-color: red; opacity: 0.7;">Uncaught Error: Somthing went wrong!
  at <anonymous>:1:7
(anonymous) @ VM109:1)
</span>

We can change the code of error, with `code` property, consider:

```js
const customError = new Error("Somthing went wrong!");
customError.code = 404;

console.dir(customError);
/*
Error: Somthing went wrong!
    at <anonymous>:1:13
code: 404
message: "Somthing went wrong!"
stack: "Error: Somthing went wrong!↵    at <anonymous>:1:13"
__proto__: Object
*/
```

## Useful Resources & Links

- DOM `getBoundingClientRect()`: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/getBoundingClientRect>

- More on `window` Object: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window>

- More on `location` Object: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Location>

- More on `history` Object: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/History_API>

- More on `navigator` Object: <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Navigator>
