# Basics of JavaScript

If you want create a **JavaScript** file, create a file with `js` extension. Because it hold **JavaScript** code.

There are two methods to interact HTML files with **JavaScript** files.

- Puting your code between `script` tag. For example:

    ```html
    <script>alert("Hello!");</script>
    ```

- Use `src` attribute from `script` tag to reference it into any **JavaScript** file. For example:

    ```html
    <script src="basic.js"></script>
    ```

**Warning**: Always put `script` tags in end of `body` tag in `HTML` file. For example:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">

<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title>Document</title>
</head>

<body>

    <script src="basic.js"></script>
</body>
</html>
```

**Note**: You sould import all dependencies files for a file before using it. For example:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">

<head>
  <meta charset="UTF-8" />
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
</head>

<body>

  <script src="path/app_dependencies_1.js"></script>
  <script src="path/app_dependencies_2.js"></script>
  <script src="path/file.js"></script>
</body>

</html>
```

## Variable and Constant

You can delare a variable with `let` or `var` keyword. Also you can delare a constant with `const` keyword.

As you undestood at **JavaScript-tips** file (repository (or this [link](https://github.com/Hamidalavi/Javascript-tips))), variables can be change anytime. But constant's values cannot be change. For example:

```js
let name = "Hamid";
const value = 10;

name = "Hamed";
value = 13; // Error -- constant's values can't change
```

**JavaScript** has typed values, not typed variables. Only values have type in **JavaScript**; variables are just simple containers for those values.

There is a huge confusing of many developers:

```js
variable and value
const constant = 0;
let hamid = constant;
hamid = 23;
console.log(hamid); // 23
```

As you can see, hamid's value is `23`. Because `hamid` just get `constant`'s value. `hamid` dont't convert `const`. Thinking about it abit.

## Allow and Disallow in Variable Declaration

|Allow|Disallow / Not Recommended|
|:-:|:-:|
|let userName|let user_name|
|let hamid235|let 23hamid|
|let $kindOfSpecial|let user-b|
|let _internalValue|let let|

> In Allow list, here some reason:

- Best Practice for using **camelCase**.

- compound letters and digits is good idea (like let hamid23;).

- You can starting with `$` for variables.

- You can starting with `_` for variables.

> In Disallow / Not Recommended list, here some reason:

- `let hamid_alavi` is allowed but bad practice!

- Starting digits not allowed.

- Don't use special characters!

- You can't use primary keywords for variables (like `let var;`)

## Basic Operators

|Operator|Description|Category|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|`=`|Assign value to variable|Assignment|
|`+`|Add two numbers|Math|
|`-`|Subtract two numbers|Math|
|`*`|Multiply two numbers|Math|
|`/`|Divide two numbers|Math|
|`%`|Divide two numbers, yield remainder|Math|
|`**`|Exponentiation|Math|

For example:

```js
let add = 2 + 2; // 4
let minus = 2 - 2; // 0
let mul = 2 * 3; // 6
```

## Basic Data Types

|Data Type|Example|Usage|
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|Number|`23`, `-34`, `3.14`|Important for calculation|
|String (text)|`'hi'`, `"hi"`, `` `hi` ``|Important for outputing result, gathering input|

## String

**JavaScript** have three types of string:

> ### Single quotes

```js
let hamid = 'Hello, I am single quotes';
console.log(hamid); // "Hello, I am single quotes"
```

> ### Double quotes

```js
let hamed = "Hello, I'm double quotes";
console.log(hamed); // "Hello, I'm double quotes"
```

> ### template literal

```js
let ali = `Hello, I'm backticks`;
console.log(ali); // "Hello, I'm backticks"

let lt = "template literal";
let reza = `Hello, I'm ${lt}`;
console.log(reza); // "Hello, I'm template literal"
```

**Warning**: You can't use multiple single quotes (`'`); because it's not valid in **JavaScript**. For example, `let hamed = 'Hello, I'm single quotes';` not valid, because output is `Hello I` and rest of text will ignore. So we recommend to using **double quote** or `backtick`.

We call the `` ` `` text, **template literal**. If you search that in **search engines**, you find out some examples of that.

`${ .. }` is for values, that make a dynamic string. For example, `reza` get `lt`'s value and showing in output.

Template literals also can be multiline and using indent. For example:

```js
let majid = ` Hello, I'm also
                can be multiline and indention.

it's great for everyone :)`;
console.log(majid);
/*"  Hello, I'm also
                can be multiline and indention.

it's great for everyone :)" */
```

You can do that with normal strings by `\n` scape notation. For example:

```js
let majid = " Hello, I'm also\n can be multiline. it's\n\n great for everyone :)"
console.log(majid);
/**" Hello, I'm also
 can be multiline. it's

 great for everyone :)" */
```

But indent will not shown in oputput. Console will ignore whitespaces. For more information about scape notation, read [this](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String#Escape_notation) link.

## Functions Definition

Two ways will happening:

> ### Define a function

It means that if you don't want use some code repeatly, you can define a `function` and use that functions everywhere. For define a function, you need write `function` keyword, then put anything you want (for function name). After that, write `()` for function's **parameter**(s). You can (but don’t have to) use parameters (e.g. name) and you can (but don’t have to) return values (via `return`). Then write your code between `{ .. }` curly braces (function body).

> ### Execute a function

After defining a function, you must execute it with `()`. For example:

```js
function hamid() {
    console.log("Call me!");
}

hamid(); // "Call me!"
```

**Warning**: Don't put `;` semicolon after function definition.

In functions. **Whitespace**, **line breaks** and **indentation** are all totally optional! Not required (we don't point to normal string)!

Here is a funcrion with two parameters:

```js
function add(num1, num2) {
    console.log(num1 + num2);
}

add(15,8); // 23
```

At above snippet, we pass `argument`s on `add` function. First argument is `15` and second one is `8`.

You can also declare a variable that have `function` value. For example:

```js
function add(num1, num2) {
    const result = (num1 + num2);
    return result;
}

let result = add(15, 8);
console.log(result); // 23
```

The inner `result` is seprate that outer `result`. They are completely independent. You must first read **JavaScript-tips** file (or this [link](https://github.com/Hamidalavi/Javascript-tips)) to understand that (scope section). Don't be lazy, first read that then read **JavaScript-step-by-step** file.

As a mention, you **can't** use local-scope (block-scope) variable (`=` declared inside of functions) **outside** of them.

**Note**: In a special behavior of **JavaScript** engine, you can call functions before their initialization. For example:

```js
add(15,8); // 23

function add(num1, num2) {
    console.log(num1 + num2);
}
```

## Shadowing Variables

You learned about local and global variables sope in this [link](https://github.com/Hamidalavi/Javascript-tips). What happens if you have this code?

```js
let userName = "Hamid";
function User(name) {
    let userName = name;
    console.log(name);
}

userName = 'Hamed';
User('Hamid'); // "Hamid"
```

This **will actually show** an output that says `"Hamid"` (not `"Hamed"`). You might've expected that an error gets thrown because we use and declare `userName` more than once - and as you learned, that is not allowed. It indeed is **not allowed on the same level/ in the same scope**. So this would fail:

```js
let userName = "Hamid";
let userName = "Hamed";
```

**Q**: Why does it work in the first code snippet though?

**Answer**: Because we first create a global variable `userName` via `let userName = "Hamid";`. But then we never re-declare that on the global level (that would not be allowed).

We only declare another variable inside of the function. But since variables in functions get their own scope, **JavaScript** does something which is called **shadowing**. It **creates a new variable** on a **different scope** - this variables does not overwrite or remove the global variable by the way - **both co-exist**.

When referring to `userName` inside of the `User` function we now **always refer to the local, shadowed variable**. Only if **no such local variable existed**, **JavaScript** would fall back to the **global variable**.

## Convert Data Types

All of user's **input** are `string`. For example, when you want to input a value near a number, it wouldn't do mathematic work, it will just concat that number to this `string` (user input). For example:

```js
let input = prompt("input a value");
let number = 23;

function add() {
    return console.log(input + number);
}

add(); // 2323
```

In above snippet, we use built-in function that called `prompt(..)`. All of output of this function will be `string`. In `input` tag of HTML is also give us a `string` value. It's implicitly convert the result to `string`. Be careful.

But, how can we fix this calculation? We can **convert types** of value (data). For example:

```js
let input = prompt("input a value");
let number = 23;

function add() {
    return console.log(parseInt(input) + number);
}

add(); // 46
```

In above snippet, we use built-in `parseInt(..)` function to make any result into the `integer`. Another and the easiest way is put `+` operator in front of `input`. For example:

```js
let input = prompt("input a value"); // "23"
let number = 23;

function add() {
    return console.log(+input + number);
}

add(); // 46
```

See? The result same as the previous snippet's result. `+` is a special operator. In this example, `+` operator is `parseInt(..)`. Awesome, isn't it?

Here some magics in **JavaScript**. For example:

You saw the example with a `number` and a `text number` being added `23 + '23'` in **JavaScript**. That happens because the `+` operator also supports `strings` (for string concatenation). It's the only **arithmetic** operator that supports `strings` though. For example, this will not work:

```js
'Hello' - 'llo' => NaN
```

You can't generate a `string` of `'He'` with the above code. Only `+` supports both strings and numbers. Thankfully, **JavaScript** is pretty smart and therefore is actually able to handle this code:

```js
4 * '3' => 12
```

**Note**: It yields the number (!) `12`, **not** a string `'9'`! Similarly, these operations also all work:

```js
23 - '23' => 0

23 / '23' => 1
```

Just `23` + `'23'` yields `'2323'` because here **JavaScript** uses the **I can combine text** mode of the `+` operator and generates a `string` instead of a `number`.
