# JavaScript Frameworks

In this course, you will learn about: Frameworks

## What is a Freamework

Let's compare both third-party packages and frameworks:

|**JavaScript** Library|**JavaScript** Framework|
|:-:|:-:|
|(Third-Party) packages that add functionalities|(Third-Party) packages that add functionalities & rules|
|Typically focused on one or a few core tasks|Provide a complete structure for building **JavaScript** apps|
|Examples: **Lodash** (added a couple of utility functions), **jQuery** (for querying the DOM), **Axios** (for sending Httprequests)|Examples: **Angular**, **Vue.js** and **React.js** (edge-case)|

You can learn more about these three frameworks in [this](https://academind.com/learn/angular/angular-vs-react-vs-vue-my-thoughts/) link.

## React.js

React will do the heavy lifting of reaching out to the DOM, adding elements, removing elements, adding CSS classes, removing CSS classes so that we don't have to manually write all these instructions.

There are two ways for **JavaScript** library for building User Interfaces (UIs):

1. **Declarative Approach**: We define the result, not the steps that lead to the result.
2. **Imperative Approach** (normal **JavaScript**): We define all the steps to achieve the result.

In React and also in Angular and Vue, we do that by defining so-called **Components**, which are reusable UI elements, now **not HTML elements**, these are not elements the browser would understand; in the end, these are just components. Basically **JavaScript** classes which we define in our code which then at runtime when our code and React's code executes on the page are interpreted by React. So that React then knows what to touch in the DOM and what to render where.

So we don't render the real HTML elements; in the end, we just use something which React then understands and which then in the end tells React what it should render on the screen under which circumstances.

## Useful Resources & Links

- The Big Three Frameworks In Comparison: <https://academind.com/learn/angular/angular-vs-react-vs-vue-my-thoughts/>

- More about React.js: <https://academind.com/learn/react/>
