# Performance Optimizations & Memory Leaks

In this course, you will learn about:

- What is Performance
- Measuring & Analyzing Performance
- Optimization Ideas
- Further Resources
- Benchmarking

## What is Performance?

Performance can be a lot of thinngs! There are two layers of performance. **Startup time** and **Runtime performance**.

- Startup time
  - How long does it take to **see something** on the screen?
  - How quickly is a user able to interact with the page?
  - How fast does the script load (and execute)?
- Runtime performance
  - How smooth does the application run (are there freezes or lag)?
  - How smooth do animations play, is there any **visual lag**?
  - Are there any memory leaks, is the page getting slower over time?
  - How much **work** does the script do?
  - How much memory is occupied?

**Note**: That performance is not just about **JavaScript** but about everything that's involved when it comes to visiting and using a web page. **It's influenced by a lot of factors! CSS code, HTML code and of course also JavaScript code. Also influenced by server speed / config**.

**Important** The most important thing is, the **Startup time** is just for the browser-side and **Runtime performance** is for all **JavaScript** code.

**Quote from Deployment file**: For our server-side, our **Node.js** code, the **optimization** and build for **production** part is not that important. Because we ship it on our sever and users never will download this code, it doesn't need to be as small as possible, it can be bigger, it doesn't have to be optimized. Because it's just running on our sever which is super fast typically and we save the time where the code would need to be downloaded.

## Different Layers of Performance Optimization

- Startup time
  - Bundle / Script **Size**: Delays initial parsing / execution.
  - Number of **Http Roundtrips** (e.g. because of non-bundled code, third-party library CDNs): Delays initial parsing / execution.
- Runtime performance
  - **Optimize Code Execution, DOM Access**: Avoid unnecessary code execution, especially unnecessary DOM operations / repaints.
  - Avoid **Memory Leaks**: Can crash your application in the worst case, but will slow it down in all cases.
  - Find **Code Alternatives** with Better Performance: Especially important for **high-frequency** code parts.
  - **Micro-optimizations** in your Code: Optimize for a very specific usecase (e.g. data structures for frequent access / changes, loop into an array and so on).

**Note**: **JavaScript** is not the end! As we mentioned, you can speed your page startup time and runtime performance with deleting your unnecessary HTML and CSS content.

## Measuring Performance

- Check roundtrips + script size and set script / bundle size budgets.

- Measure performance with DevTools.

  **Note**: **don't** use DevTools in development mode, just in production mode.

- Finally, explore best practices, patterns and benchmarks.

There are a couple of different ways of measuring it. As we mentioned, the browser DevTools, you also can add certain code snippets to your code:

1. **`performance.now()`**: Add this to your code (during development / testing) and check the execution time (difference) for certain operations.
2. **Browser DevTool**: Use the many features of browser dev tools to detect unnecessary code executions, http requests and measure execution time + memory leaks.
3. **jsperf.com**: Compare alternative code snippets and measure performance.
4. **webpagetest.com**: Test your entire (live) web page to detect optimization potential.

## Woking with Chrome DevTools

- We can check the **Elements** tab in google chrome browser. We can see the highlight of elements when they were changed, added and removed. For example, if you have a list item (`ul` with some `li`s), when you delete one of that (list), all lists will be highlighted and it is related to the performance topic.

- We can go to the **Network** tab and at the top of the page, we select the **slow 3G** mode and enable the `Disable caches` checkbox (for disabling the cache). Now if we have a script file more than `1MB`, the buttons and other elements will not work anymore until the file is downloaded. This is now why a too large script file could be a problem.

- We can go to the **Performance** tab and then click on the **gear** icon. If we choose the CPU to `6x slowdown`, our process will done slower. Simple apps are not effected, because they don't have that complex of a script on it.

- In this **Performance** tab, we can record our job by clicking the red circle. If we do that, we can see all interations and inputs and events and and so on. In **Main** thread, if a box have a red mark (red triangle at top right), it means that this function takes too milliseconds (or seconds) or takes more time than other functions and events.

- We can go to the **Memory** tab and then click on the `Take Snapshot` button (or big circle at top left). We can remove an element and again add another snapshot. Then in the second snapshot, we take a `Compariaon` instead of `Summary` option and we see the comparison of jobs that we did before.
  - Diving Deeper Into Memory Analysis: <https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/memory-problems>

- We can go to the **Lighthouse** tab (or **Audits**) and get some report from our website performance, SEO, Progressive Web App (PWA) and so on. This tab is awesome for optimizing our code.

- We can go to the **Coverage** tab and then check our unused files (by percent). It's great for checking the website performance and improving the startup time.

**Note**: You need to reload the page to see the percentage.

- We can go to the **Rendering** tab and then enable the **Paint flashing** ckeckbox to see the screen updates (i.e. it likes the **Elements** tab and we can see the highlighting the elements when they are added, updated and removed).

Chrome DevTools Performance Tab Docs: <https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/evaluate-performance/reference>

Google Performance Docs: <https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rendering/optimize-javascript-execution>

## Benchmarking

We can compare two or more code with together with these following links.

Benchmarking 1: <https://jsben.ch/>

Benchmarking 2: <https://jsbench.me/>

For example:

```js
// normal for loop
let arr = [1, 2, 3];
for (let i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
  console.log(i);
}
/*
result:
5161.1 ops/s 6.2%
*/

// for..of loop
let i = [1, 2, 3];
for (const index of i) {
  console.log(index);
}
/*
result:
4897.32 ops/s 5.54%
*/
```

**Note**: In the big projects, normal `for` loops are fastest choice than other loops.

## Improvement Ideas

When it comes to the overall performance of a website, it's not just **JavaScript** that matters though. Besides other client-side optimizations (e.g. CSS, images => see: <https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/optimizing-content-efficiency)>, it's also the server-side where you can improve performance.

Executing code on the server-side (e.g. **Node.js**) is one thing but the server configuration is also important.

Specifically, there are **three** main areas of improvement which you might want to look into:

- Compression of served assets
- Caching (client-side and server-side)
- HTTP/2

> Compression

Compression is about zipping static assets (CSS, **JavaScript**, images) before serving them. Modern browsers know how to unzip such files and will automatically do so. Since zipped assets are transferred, less data is sent from server to client => Faster load time.

How you set up compression depends on which server / service you're using. For example on Firebase, static assets are automatically compressed.

When having your own **Node.js** server-side code, you would have to manually ensure that static assets are compressed (<https://github.com/expressjs/compression>).

> Caching

Caching is a complex topic - it's about saving data or files for re-use and it can be done on different levels.

For example, browser automatically cache files (e.g. **JavaScript** files) for you - based on the caching headers set by the serving host (<https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control>). So controlling these headers on the server-side config, allows you to control how browsers will cache such files. This can help you avoid unnecessary data transfer but of course you also have to make sure that visitors of your site don't miss out on important updates.

Server-side caching is all about storing data you work with on the server (e.g. fetched from a database) such that multiple requests requesting the same data can get that cached data.

You can learn more about caching here: <https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/optimizing-content-efficiency/http-caching>

And here: <https://wp-rocket.me/blog/different-types-of-caching/>

> HTTP/2

HTTP/2 is the latest **form** of the Http protocol and unlike HTTP 1, it allows for **server push**. That means that servers can push required assets / files actively to a client (instead of waiting for the client to request them).

You can learn more about it here: <https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/http2>

## Useful Tips

> Startup Time – Potential Improvements

- Eliminate unnecessary / unused code, avoid using too many libraries.
- Potentially add third-party libraries to bundle instead of via CDN.
- Bundle code and use **lazy loading**.
- Minify code (or use minifier extension in VsCode)

> Runtime Performance – Potential Improvements

- Avoid unnecessary code executions, batch operations together.
- Find + fix memory leaks, even small ones.
- For high-frequency operations: Use optimal **JavaScript** approach (revalidate regularly).
- Consider micro-optimizations (like `for` loops and arrays).

## Useful Resources & Links

- Google Performance Docs: <https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/rendering>

- Chrome DevTools Performance Docs: <https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/evaluate-performance/reference>

- Chrome DevTools Memory Docs: <https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/memory-problems>
