# How JavaScript Works, The Weird Parts & ES5 vs #ES6+

What is ES mean? ES stands for **ECMAScript**. ECMAScript and therefore **JavaScript** will evolve over the time.

**Note**: ECMA = European Computer Manufacturers Association.

## `var` vs `let` vs `const`

`var` allows us to create variable in the **function** and **global** scope.

`let` does not really use function and **global** scope, although in many cases in behaves exactly like that, but it uses a concept called **block scope** and the same is true for `const`. Let's do this with some examples.

Consider this example:

```js
var name = "Hamid";
var name = "Hamed";
var name = "Ali";
console.log(name); // "Ali"
```

We declared three variables with same name. **JavaScript** automatically executes (choose) the last declared variable (if they are in same name). Actually, the latest variable will override all previous ones.

But it's not works on `let` keyword (or `const`), you will get an error for doing same behavior. For example:

```js
let name = "Hamid";
let name = "Hamed"; // error is here
let name = "Ali";
let name = "Reza";
console.log(name); // SyntaxError: Identifier 'name' has already been declared
```

As a mention, we said `let` keyword is **block scope**. What is it mean?

Consider:

```js
{
  var name1 = "Hamid";
  let name2 = "Hamed";
}
console.log(name1, name2); // ReferenceError: name2 is not defined -- name1 = "Hamid"
```

As you can see, `let` keyword is just available in `{ .. }` pair. It's a best thing and secure your code.

In other hand, we have **function scope**. In **JavaScript** with `let` and `const` you can define variables or constants in global scope or block scope (local scope) and use them in their own scope. But with `var`, variables are accessible entire the **function scope**. In other words, `var` only knows **global scope** and **function scope**, as we said before, but `let` and `const` knows **block scope**. For example:

```js
function hobby() {
  if (true) {
    var myHobby = "Programming";
  }
  console.log(`My favorite hobby is ${myHobby}`);
}

hobby(); // "My favorite hobby is Programming"
```

Let's try it with `let` and `const` keyword:

```js
function hobby() {
  if (true) {
    let myHobby = "Programming";
  }
  console.log(`My favorite hobby is ${myHobby}`);
}

hobby(); // ReferenceError: myHobby is not defined
```

```js
function hobby() {
  if (true) {
    const myHobby = "Programming";
  }
  console.log(`My favorite hobby is ${myHobby}`);
}

hobby(); // ReferenceError: myHobby is not defined
```

Because `let` and `const` are **block scope**. So don't use `var` anymore.

## Shadowing Variables

You learned about **local** and **global** variables scope in this [link](https://github.com/Hamidalavi/Javascript-tips) and previous section. What happens if you have this code?

```js
let userName = "Hamid";

function User(name) {
  let userName = name;
  console.log(name);
}

userName = "Hamed";
User("Hamid"); // "Hamid"
```

This **will actually show** an output that says `"Hamid"` (not `"Hamed"`). You might've expected that an error gets thrown because we use and declare `userName` more than once - and as you learned, that is not allowed (more info in 2.Basics). Let's see another example:

```js
let name = "Hamid";

function greet() {
  let name = "Ali";
  console.log(name);
}

greet(); // "Ali"
```

If we also change the `name` value, it not works anymore, because that variables (first one) is ignored. For example:

```js
let name = "Hamid";

function greet() {
  let name = "Ali";
  console.log(name);
}

name = "Reza"; // -- edit global vriable
greet(); // "Ali"
```

Here, if we use `var` keyword, we get a same result. What happens if we use `name` twice?

```js
var name = "Hamid";
var name = "Hamed";

function greet() {
  let name = "Ali";
  console.log(name);
}

console.log(name); // "Hamed"

greet(); // "Ali"
```

As you can see,we got `"Hamed"` in output. Because the latest variable will override all previous ones.

## Hoisting

**JavaScript** has a special feature called **hoisting** which in the end means that the **JavaScript** engine, the browser, loads scripts and reads them from top to bottom. For example:

```js
console.log(name);
var name = "Hamid";
//  behind the scene --> undefined
```

As you can see, nothing happened. But if we use `let` keyword, we get an error (as strict mode), for example:

```js
console.log(name);
let name = "Hamid"; // ReferenceError: Cannot access 'name' before initialization
```

`let` and `const` are very useful. If you use `var`, don't use it anymore. Always put your variables and constants at top; if someone want to reads your code, if he/she for example, saw `name` variable in `if` statement and `for` or `while` loops and etc. , generally he/she looks at top of scripts. If `name` not declared at top, he/she must reads entire of script. So, always put variables on top for both **better programming** and **hoisting**. You can use `"use strict"` for check your issues and strict your code (script). For example, if you use pre-reserved keywords, you get an error:

```js
"use strict";
console.log(undefined);
var undefined = "Hamid";
// TypeError: Cannot assign to read only property 'undefined' of object
```

Or if you didn't declared a variable without `var` or `let` or `const`, **strict mode** will argue that behavior. For example:

```js
"use strict";
name = "Hamid";

console.log(name); // ReferenceError: name is not defined
```

Thankfully `let` and `const` are here. Use them as primary keywords in your projects.

You also get error when use same key in objects;

```js
"use strict";
var o = { p: 1, p: 2 }; // !!! syntax error -- { p: 2 }
console.log(o);
```

This is no longer the case in ECMAScript 2015 (bug). You can see many examples of `use strict` in [this](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Strict_mode#Changes_in_strict_mode) link.

## How Code is Parsed and Compiled?

What does execute the script mean?

Read [this](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Projects/SpiderMonkey/Internals) and [this](file:///run/media/hamid/Game%20&%20Program/Learn/English/Javascript/English%20Javascript/Udemy%20-%20JavaScript%20-%20The%20Complete%20Guide%202020%20(Beginner%20+%20Advanced)%202020-6/5.%20Behind%20the%20Scenes%20&%20The%20(Weird)%20Past%20(ES3,%20ES5)%20&%20Present%20(ES6+)%20of%20JavaScript/7.2%20Understanding%20the%20V8%20(Chrome)%20JS%20Engine%20Works.html) links.

## Primitive and Reference Values

- Primitive:
  - Strings
  - Numbers
  - Booleans
  - null
  - undefined
  - Symbol

  For exmple:

  ```js
  let name = "Hamid";
  const PI = 3.14;
  let isLoggedIn = false;
  ...
  ```

- Reference:

  Variables and objects that are referenced (all other objects) For example:

  ```js
  let name = "Hamid";
  let MyFirstName = name; // --> referenced to `name`
  console.log(MyFirstName); // "Hamid"

  MyFirstName = "Hamed";
  console.log(MyFirstName); // "Hamed"
  ```

> Differences of **primitive** and **reference**:

- Primitive:
  - Stored in memory (normally on Stack), variable stores value itself.
  - Copying a value (`=` assign to different variable) **copies the value**.

- Reference:
  - Stored in memory (Heap), variable stores a pointer (address) to location in memory. In other words, a `reference` to the object stored in memory (hence **reference value**).
  - Copying a variable (`=` assign to different variable) **copies the pointer / reference**.

More example on `reference` for better understanding:

```js

```
