# Arrays & Iterables - Lists of Data

In this course, you learn about:

- Different Ways of Creating Arrays
- Working with Arrays
- Important Array Methods
- Other Iterables: Maps & Sets

## Iterable

- **Technically**: Objects that Implement the **iterable** protocol and have an `@@iterator` method (i.e. `Symbol.iterator`).

- **To us humans**: Objects where you can use the `for..of` loop.

**Note**: Not every iterable is an array! Other iterables are (for example): NodeList, String, Map, Set.

## Array-like Objects

- **Technically**: Objects that have a length property and use indexes to access items.

- **To us humans**: See technical explanation.

**Note**: Not every array-like object is an array! Other array-likes are (for example): NodeList, String.

## Creating Arrays

We have some different ways of creating an array:

- `const array = [1];`
- `const array = Array(1);`
- `const array = new Array(1);`
- `const array = Array.of(1);`
- `const array = Array.from(1);`
- `const array = ['Hi'];`
- `const array = Array('Hi');`
- `const array = new Array('Hi');`
- `const array = Array.of('Hi');`
- `const array = Array.from('Hi');`

First and easiest way of creating an array is: Using a `[]` square brackets:

```js
const array = [15, 8];
console.log(array); // [ 15, 8 ]
```

The second way of creating an array is: Using **array constructor**. For example:

```js
const array2 = new Array(15, 8);
console.log(array2); // [ 15, 8 ]
```

**Warning**: In this way, if you pass a single number, this will be interpreted as the length, for example: `const array3 = new Array(5);`, the output will be different and strange: `[ <5 empty items> ]` or `(5) [empty × 5]`.

**Note**: You can omit the `new` keyword. But you should use the `[]` square brackets instead of that.

Another way of creating an array, is with `Array.of()`. This way works exactly like `[]` square brackets:

```js
const array4 = Array.of(5);
console.log(array4); // [ 5 ]

const array5 = Array.of(15, 8);
console.log(array5); // [ 15, 8 ]
```

**Note**: Now again, you should use `[]` square brackets, this will be slower from a performance perspective than that.

Another special way of creating an array, is with `Array.from()`. If you pass multiple arguments, you will get an error:

```js
const array6 = Array.from(15, 8);
console.log(array6); // TypeError
```

Because you must not pass in multiple arguments here. instead this takes an iterable or an array-like object and that's the interesting thing. `Array.from()` in the end allows you to convert an iterable or an array-like object  which isn't an array yet, to an array. Of course you can pass in an **array** here. for example:

```js
const array7 = Array.from([15, 8]);
console.log(array7); // [ 15, 8 ]
```

It's more interesting if you have an array-like object or an iterable which you want to convert to an array. Let's say here a sting, `"Hi"`; if you pass this into `Array.from()`, you see you get an array where this is **split into separate characters** that make up that array (useful for converting array-like or iterable objects to real arrays):

```js
const array8 = Array.from("Hi");
console.log(array8); // [ 'H', 'i' ]
```

---

You can store numbers, strings and object into the arrays:

- Numbers = `const num = [15, 8];`
- Strings = `const str = ["Hi", "Wellcome"];`
- Objects = `const obj = [{name: "Hamid, age: 23}];`
- Mixed = `const mix = [23, "Hamid", {moreDetail: []}];`

You can also have nested arrays or multi-dimensional arrays, for example:

```js
const nestedArrays = [[15, 8], [22, 26]];
```

Now, how can we (you) access elements with `for` loop? very easy, first we access nested arrays (`[15, 8]` and `[22, 26]`) then we access each of index (elements) of them:

```js
const nestedArrays = [[15, 8], [22, 26]];

for (const data of nestedArrays) {
  for (const dataPoint of data) {
    console.log(dataPoint); // 15 8 22 26
  }
}
```

Be careful how you can use your array, if you pass a number (not array) in front of these two array, you will get an error:

```js
const nestedArrays = [[15, 8], [22, 26], 5];

for (const data of nestedArrays) {
  for (const dataPoint of data) {
    console.log(dataPoint); // TypeError: data is not iterable
  }
}
```

If you see our code, we loop over this array with this outer loop and we have a look at each array element and then we loop over that array element again which works for iterables, but **not for numbers**.

Arrays are index-based, so we can access data by **index**. Index starts at `0` or `zero`, so the first element in an array has an index `0`, second element has an index of `1`, third element has an index of `2` and so on. For example:

```js
const zb = ["Hello", "I'm", 23, "Years", "Old"];
console.log(zb[0]); // "Hello"
console.log(zb[2]); // 23
```

We can't use negative number for this way, for example:

```js
const array = ["hamid", "hamed", "Ali", "Reza"];
console.log(array[-1]); // undefined
```

But it is works in some methods (like `splice()`, `indexOf()` and etc.). If you see `-1` result, that means it is a last index. For example, we have `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]`. Here index `-1` is `5`. Or index `-2` is `4` (indeed, reverse indexes).

## Inserting and Removing Elements

We can add elements into the an array with `push`method. This method adds one or more elements to the end of an array and returns the new length of the array. For example:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.push("Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Hamid', 'Hamed', 'Ali' ] -- (3)
```

We can also add elements into the an array with `unshift` method (strange name). This method adds one or more elements to the start of an array and returns the new length of the array. For example:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.unshift("Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Ali', 'Hamid', 'Hamed' ] -- (3)
```

**Q**: How can we remove the elements?

**Answer**: We can remove an element by `pop()` method, it removes the last element from an array and returns it, for example:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.unshift("Ali");
array.pop(); // `'Hamed'` removed
console.log(array); // [ 'Ali', 'Hamid' ] -- (2)
```

Then we can remove an element by `shift()` method, it removes the first element from an array and returns it, for example:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.unshift("Ali");
array.pop(); // `'Hamed'` removed
array.shift(); // `'Ali'` removed
console.log(array); // [ 'Hamid' ]
```

**Q**: Why doesn't `shift()` add an item and `unshift()` remove it?

**Answer**: Because `unshift()` sounds way more like removing somthing than `shift()`. Well actually, the naming makes sense, what `shift` does is it **shifts** all elements in the array one place **to the left**. That's why the first element gets dropped when we call `shift()`. Now `unshift` on the other hand, **Shifts** all elements **to the right** in the end.

**Warning**: We recommend you to use `push()` and `pop()` methods, because `shift()` and `unshift()` will cost a little bit of performance. Because they shift all elements in left or right in one place (in one time).

## `splice()` Method

`splice()` method helps up insert elements between two elements or removing an element(s).

`splice()` skeleton is:

- The way `splice()` works is that you tell it the **index** where it should start looking, including that index (first parameter)
- Delete as many elements as we will specify (second parameter).
- Insert in place of that element where you start looking.

**Note**: Indeed, `splice()` method, removes elements from an array and, if necessary, inserts new elements in their place, returning the deleted elements.

For example:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.splice(0, 0, "Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Ali', 'Hamid', 'Hamed' ]
```

We selecting index `0` for insertion. Then, we said `0` element(s) want to remove. Finally, we pass `"Ali"` into the array (in index `0`).

Now we want put `"Ali"` between `"Hamid"` and `"Hamed"`:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.splice(1, 0, "Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Hamid', 'Ali', 'Hamed' ]
```

As you can see, we put `"Ali"` in index `1` (first parameter). Let's try another example, we want put `"Ali"` in place of `"Hamed"` (`"Hamed"` will remove, then `"Ali"` will replace):

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.splice(1, 1, "Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Hamid', 'Ali' ]
```

We selected index `1` and said: We want delete one element (`"Hamed"`), then we put `"Ali"`. Another example:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed"];
array.splice(0, 1, "Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Ali', 'Hamed' ]
```

Here, we selected the first element (at index `0`) and said: We want delete one element (`"Hamid"`), then we put `"Ali"`.

We can remove all elements by `splice(0)`:

```js
const array = ["Majid", "Hamid", "Hamed", "Ali"];
array.splice(0); // []
console.log(array);
```

Another way is:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed", "Ali"];
array.splice(0,2);
console.log(array); // [ 'Ali' ]
```

We selected index `0` then remove two elements (`"Hamid"` and `"Hamed"`).

**Note**: You can add more values (string) in `splice()` arguments:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed", "Ali"];
array.splice(0, 2, "Reza", "Mehrdad", "Majid", "Morteza");
console.log(array); // [ 'Reza', 'Mehrdad', 'Majid', 'Morteza', 'Ali' ]
```

We can also use negative values in `splice()` method:

```js
const array = ["Hamid", "Hamed", "Reza"];
array.splice(-1, 0, "Ali");
console.log(array); // [ 'Hamid', 'Hamed', 'Ali', 'Reza' ]
```

**Note**: Don't use negative number in `deleteCount`, it's not work. Use negative just for index (position),

You need to practice to understand how this method works. We recommned you to use first method (`splice(start, deleteCount, value)`).

## `slice()` Method

As you know, arrays are reference values, consider:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array;

console.log(array2); // [ 1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77 ]
```

`array2` is pointing the `array` address. If we the change the `array2`, well that still points at the same address. So, it points at the same changed array. For example:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array;

array.push(100);

console.log(array2); // [ 1,  2,  34, -56, 4, 77, 100 ]
```

That's something where `slice()` can help us, because it returns a brand new array based on the old array. (indeed, it brand new address -- make copy of that array). For example:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array.slice();

array.push(100);

console.log(array2); // [ 1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77 ]
```

Actually, `slice()` is also really nice for selecting ranges of an array. For example, you want to select a part of your array, not the entire array, but a part:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array.slice(0, 3);

console.log(array2); // [ 1, 2, 34 ]
```

We can also use negative numbers in `splice()` method:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array.slice(-3, -1);

console.log(array2); // [ -56, 4 ]
```

We selected index `3` (or `-3`) as start. Then we choose index `4` (or `-1`) as end point.

We can pass single number in `slice()`, for example:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array.slice(2);

console.log(array2); // [ 34, -56, 4, 77 ]
```

As you can see, we selected index `2` as start point. It's like `[1, )` or `(x, ∞)`.

## `concat()` Method

Here, there is the `concat()` method which we can call. The `concat()` method allows us to concatenate, so to add elements at the of an array.

```js
const array = [1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77];
const array2 = array.concat(1000);

console.log(array2); // [ 1, 2, 34, -56, 4, 77, 1000 ]
```

**Warning**: Some developers think `concat()` method is the same as `push()`, but it doesn't. But why? Answer is here;

```js
// push()
const array = [1, 2, 3];
array.push([4, 5, 6]);
console.log(array); // [ 1, 2, 3, [ 4, 5, 6 ] ]

// concat()
const array = [1, 2, 3];
array.concat([4, 5, 6]);
console.log(array); // [ 1, 2, 3 ]
```

Because it returns a brand new array based on the old array. (indeed, it brand new address -- make copy of that array). You must store it in new variable or constant:

```js
const array = [1, 2, 3];
const newArray = array.concat([4, 5, 6]);

console.log(newArray); // [ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ]
```

As you can see, `push()` result is `[ 1, 2, 3, [ 4, 5, 6 ] ]` and `concat()` result is `[ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ]`.

Indeed, `concat()` method combines two or more arrays with an existing array.

## `indexOf()` Method

We also encounter use cases or scenarios where we have an array of data and now we want to find out at which index in that array a certain item sits, consider:

```js
const array = [10, 22, 23, 56, 43, 42, 78];
```

Let's say we want to find out where in this array, with the value of `43` lives. We can find index of `43` with `indexOf()` method:

```js
const array = [10, 22, 23, 56, 43, 42, 78];
console.log(array.indexOf(43)); // 4
```

We also have an optional second argument that would allow us to specify a starting index. For example, only start searching on elements with index `2` or highter:

```js
const array = [10, 22, 23, 56, 43, 42, 78];
console.log(array.indexOf(1, 2)); // -1
```

See first part of this course for understanding negative numbers.
