# Objects

In this course, you learn about: Closer Look at Objects.

## Learn about Objects

Objects are **core data structures in JavaScript**.

- Typically reflect **real-world** entities
  - e.g. button, movie.
  - Allow us to apply real-world logic to coding.
- Made up of properties & methods
  - Store data in properties and actions in methods.
  - Allow you to **group** related data together and split your code into logical pieces.

Well is in **JavaScript** you, must never forget that you have two types of values, **primitive values** and **reference values**, and in the end, reference values are object. So only objects are reference values.

|Primitive Values|Reference Values (= Objects)|
|:-:|:-:|
|Numbers|Everything else!|
|Strings|`{ .. }`|
|Booleans|Arrays|
|null|DOM Nodes|
|undefined|... other built-in objects|
|Symbol|-|

Objects are **reference values** - you learned that.

It might not have been obvious yet but it's also important to recognize that, in the end, **objects are of course made up of primitive values**. Here's an example:

```js
const complexPerson = {
  name: "Hamid",
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  address: {
    street: "Some Street",
    stateId: 10,
    country: "Iran",
    phone: {
      number: Number("+989216570293"),
      isMobile: true,
    },
  },
};
```

Event though `complexPerson` has multiple nested reference values (nested arrays and objects), you end up with primitive values if you drill into the object.

- `name` holds a string (`"Hamid"`) => Primitive value.

- `hobbies` holds an array (i.e. a reference value) which is full of strings (`"Programming"`, `"Gaming"`) => Primitive values.

- `address` holds an object which in turn holds a mixture of primitive values like `"Some Street"` and nested objects (`phone`), but if you dive into `phone`, you find only numbers and booleans in there => Primitive values.

So you could say: **Primitive values are the core building blocks that hold your data**, **objects (and arrays) are helpful for organizing and working with that data**.

If we created an object, we can enter a dot (`.`) operator and now we have access to all the properties and methods that are stored on this object:

```js
const person = {
  name: "Hamid",
  age: 23,
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  greet: function () {
    alert("Hi there!");
  },
};

console.log(person.name); // "Hamid"
```

If we access a properpy on an object which doesn't exist, we're not getting error; instead, we get `undefined`:

```js
const person = {
  name: "Hamid",
  age: 23,
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  greet: function () {
    alert("Hi there!");
  },
};

console.log(person.name); // "Hamid"
console.log(person.isAdmin); // undefined
```

We can simply assign a value to this property now. Even if we didn't define it before:

```js
const person = {
  name: "Hamid",
  age: 23,
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  greet: function () {
    alert("Hi there!");
  },
};

console.log(person.name); // "Hamid"

person.isAdmin = true;
console.log(person.isAdmin); // true
```

We can modify object properties by `.` dot opertor. For example:

```js
const person = {
  name: "Hamid",
  age: 23,
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  greet: function () {
    alert("Hi there!");
  },
};

console.log(person.name); // "Hamid"

person.name = "Reza";
console.log(person.name); // "Reza"
```

If we want to delete a property (one way of getting rid of a property), there is a `delete` keyword for doing that:

```js
const person = {
  name: "Hamid",
  age: 23,
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  greet: function () {
    alert("Hi there!");
  },
};

delete person.name;
console.log(person.name); // undefined
```

**Note**: If we want to try to access `name`, it will not get an error, will just get `undefined`.

Therefore another way of getting rid of a property is to use `person.name = undefined`. Keep in mind that you should actually never assign `undefined` to any value.

## Special Key Names

We can use any `string` as a key in an object and actually any key we enter is automatically coerced, which is this behind the scenes automatic convertion to us could say, to a string. So even `name` is kind of converted to a string in **JavaScript**. Consider:

```js
const person = {
  first-name: "Hamid",
  age: 23,
  hobbies: ["Programming", "Gaming"],
  greet: function () {
    alert("Hi there!");
  },
};
// SyntaxError: Unexpected token '-'
```
