# Classes & Object-oriented Programming

In this course, you learn about:

- What is **Object-oriented Programming** (OOP)?
- Classes & Instances
- Properties, Fields & Methods
- Inheritance

## Classes and Instances

The `class` skeleton is:

```js
class Example {
    ...
}
```

Let's take a look with different of `object` and `class`:

```js
const example1 = {
  title: "DEAFAULT",
  description: "NO DESCRIPTION",
};

class Example2 {
  title = "DEAFAULT";
  description = "NO DESCRIPTION";
}
```

- In `class` we must use `=` assignment instead of `:` colon.
- In `class` we must put `;` semicolon instead of `,` comma in the end of line after such a field.
- The convention is to **start with an uppercase character** (ex: `Example2`).
- In `class` we call `field` instead of `property`.

Now, how can we instance the `class`? This is simple, with `new` keyword, for example:

```js
class MyClass {
  title = "DEAFAULT";
  description = "NO DESCRIPTION";
}

console.log(MyClass); // [class MyClass]
console.log(new MyClass()); // MyClass { title: 'DEAFAULT', description: 'NO DESCRIPTION' }
console.log(MyClass()); // TypeError: Class constructor MyClass cannot be invoked without 'new'
```

To start with, let's give you a simplistic, high-level view of what Object-oriented programming (OOP) is. We say **simplistic**, because OOP can quickly get very complicated, and giving it a full treatment now would probably confuse more than help. The basic idea of OOP is that we use objects to model real world things that we want to represent inside our programs, and / or provide a simple way to access functionality that would otherwise be hard or impossible to make use of.

Objects can contain related **data** and **code**, which represent information about the thing you are trying to model, and functionality or behavior that you want it to have. Object data (and often, functions too) can be stored neatly (the official word is **encapsulated**) inside an object package (which can be given a specific name to refer to, which is sometimes called a **namespace**), making it easy to structure and access; objects are also commonly used as data stores that can be easily sent across the network.

## Constructors and Object Instances

**JavaScript** uses special functions called `constructor` functions to define and initialize objects and their features. They are useful because you'll often come across situations in which you don't know how many objects you will be creating; **constructors** provide the means to create as many objects as you need in an effective way, attaching data and functions to them as required.

Let's explore creating classes via constructors and creating object instances from them in **JavaScript**:

```js
class Product {
  title = "DEFAULT"; // default value
  imageUrl;
  price;
  description;

  constructor(title, url, price, desc) {
    this.title = title;
    this.imageUrl = url;
    this.price = price;
    this.description = desc;
  }
}

const product = new Product(
  "JavaScript",
  "https://i.pinimg.com/originals/fc/c5/bd/fcc5bdf4590e2459f4b9aa606fe4ce43.jpg",
  199.99,
  "A good course"
);

console.log(product);
/*
Product {
  title: 'JavaScript',
  imageUrl: 'https://i.pinimg.com/originals/fc/c5/bd/fcc5bdf4590e2459f4b9aa606fe4ce43.jpg',
  price: 199.99,
  description: 'A good course'
}
*/
```

**Note**: We can instance a class with `new` keyword.

## Class Fields vs Properties

Consider:

```js
class Product {
  category = "DEFAULT";
  constructor(title) {
    this.title = title;
  }

  printInfo() {
    console.log(this.title, this.category);
  }
}
```

- `category = "DEFAULT";`: It's a class field.
- `this.title = title;`: It's a class property.
- `printInfo() { console.log(this.title, this.category); }`: It's a class method.

**Note**: Nice to know => Fields define properties for classes.

There is an interesting thing is class, that we can omit the fields, for example:

```js
// before
class Product {
  category = "DEFAULT";
  title;
  constructor(title) {
    this.title = title;
  }
}

console.log(new Product("Title")); // Product { category: 'DEFAULT', title: 'Title' }

// after
class Product {
  category = "DEFAULT";
  constructor(title) {
    this.title = title;
  }
}

console.log(new Product("Title")); // Product { category: 'DEFAULT', title: 'Title' }
```

When we define a property, we can define a not existence property (field) like object, like:

```js
const object = {
  name: "Hamid",
};

object.age = 23;

console.log(object); // { name: 'Hamid', age: 23 }
```

`age` not exist in `object` object, but we can access it. This way like above (for removal way).

## `bind()` Method and `this` keyword

The `bind` methods shines in classes and DOM, this method is very useful for controlling the functions and methods, for example:

```js
const addCartButton = document.querySelector("button");

// method
 addToCart() {
  console.log("Adding to cart...");
  console.log(this.product); // `product` from constructor
}

addCartButton.addEventListener("click", this.cartFunc); // undefiend

addCartButton.addEventListener("click", this.addToCart.bind(this)); // product object
```

As you can see, first result is `undefined`, because it refers to this`addCartButton` element. This is normal, because this button doesn't have anything.

But `this.addToCart.bind(this)` refers to `addToCart` method and class, not `addCartButton` button.

**Note**: We have another way for doing this with **anonymous arrow function**, for example:

```js
const addCartButton = document.querySelector("button");

// method
 addToCart() {
  console.log("Adding to cart...");
  console.log(this.product); // `product` from constructor
}

addCartButton.addEventListener("click", this.cartFunc); // undefiend

addCartButton.addEventListener("click", this.addToCart.bind(this)); // method 1 -- product object
addCartButton.addEventListener("click", () => this.addToCart()); // method 2 -- product object
```

If we do this and that's all it takes `this.addToCart()` is then the function body; then here **since arrow functions don't know `this`**, will not be bound to what the `addEventListener` wants to bind item, because the arrow function ignores this as you learned, but instead it will keep its context. It will refer to the exact same thing it would refer to in that code (in that `method`) in general.

So by wrapping it in an arrow function like `() => this.addToCart()`, we ensure that this works. The only thing we now have to do is **we have to execute it** here (`addToCart()`), because this now the function body of that arrow function.

The body of the function therefore then only runs when that anonymous function executes, which is why here in the body (`this.addToCart()`) we have to execute this, so that this does execute when this outer anonymous function (`() => this.addToCart()`) executes.

The another perfect way is make `method` to anonymous function, here an example:

```js
const addCartButton = document.querySelector("button");

// method
 addToCart = () => {
  console.log("Adding to cart...");
  console.log(this.product); // `product` from constructor
}

addCartButton.addEventListener("click", this.addToCart); // product object
```

Now we're not using the method shorthand (concise method), instead we creating a field which holds an arrow function, and since arrow functions don't care about what we bound (or you bound) `this` (`this.product`) to, instead they always give us this in the context, it would would have otherwise as well. `this` (`this.product`) since it's inside of that class here in the end, will refer to the object created by the class, **not to what it would normally refer to, and in this case, that would be the buton of course**.

**Note**: For more information, read **Introducing `this`** title from **More on Objects.md** file.

## Static Properties, Fields & Methods

Different of **static** field/property/method and **instance** field/property/method:

static:

- Defined with `static` keyword.
- Only accessible on class itself, without instantiation (i.e. not on instance).
- Typically used in helper classes, global configuration etc.

instance:

- Defined **without** `static` keyword.
- Only accessible on instances (objects) based on class.
- Used for core, re-usable logic.

**Note**: In static field/property/method, we can directly access the class method without a `new` keyword (without instance), for example: `App.init()`. Consider:

```js
class App {
  title;
  description;

  static init() {
    console.log("Yeah");
  }
}

App.init(); // "Yeah"
```

As you can see, we omit the `new` keyword and avoid instance method (or field and property).

## Inheritance

With most of the gory details of OOJS now explained, we show how to create **child** object classes (constructors) that inherit features from their **parent** classes. In addition, we present some advice on when and where you might use OOJS, and look at how classes are dealt with in modern ECMAScript syntax. Consider:

```js
class Person {
  height;
  isFat;
  age;
  name;

  constructor(name, age, height, isFat) {
    this.height = height;
    this.isFat = isFat;
    this.age = age;
    this.name = name;
    console.log(name, age, height, isFat);
  }
}

new Person("Hamid", 23, 180, false); // "Hamid" 23 180 false
```

We can add another `class` that inherits from `Person` class. We can do this with `extends` keyword. For example:

```js
class Girl extends Person {}

new Girl("Sarah", 23, 180, false); // "Sarah" 23 180 false
```

And Consider this:

```js
class Person {
  height;
  isFat;
  age;
  name;

  constructor(name, age, height, isFat) {
    this.height = height;
    this.isFat = isFat;
    this.age = age;
    this.name = name;
    console.log(name, age, height, isFat);
  }
}

class Girl extends Person {}
new Girl("Sarah", 23, 180, false); // "Sarah" 23 180 false

class Boy extends Girl {}
new Boy("Hamid", 23, 180, false); // "Hamid" 23 180 false
```

As you can see, `Boy` class inherits from `Girl` class, and `Girl` class inherits from `Person` class (`Person` class is grand parent of `Boy` & `Person` is parent of `Girl` class). It means `Girl` and `Boy` class automatically look for their parent constructor (`Parent` constructor).

We can avoid duplication by this method. This is very useful and great for performance.

**Warning**: If any child of parent class have constructor, it doesn't look for parent constructor. It just look to own constructor. For example:

```js
class Parent {
  height;
  isFat;
  age;
  name;

  constructor(name, age, height, isFat) {
    this.height = height;
    this.isFat = isFat;
    this.age = age;
    this.name = name;
    console.log(name, age, height, isFat);
  }
}

class Child extends Parent {
  constructor() {} // <-- look this
}

new Child("Hamid", 23, 180, false); // ReferenceError
```

We can solve this problem (actually this is not a problem) by `super` keyword, for example:

```js
class Parent {
  height;
  isFat;
  age;
  name;

  constructor(name, age, height, isFat) {
    this.height = height;
    this.isFat = isFat;
    this.age = age;
    this.name = name;
    console.log(name, age, height, isFat);
  }
}

class Child extends Parent {
  constructor(a, b, c, d) {
    super(a, b, c, d);
  }
}

new Child("Hamid", 23, 180, false); // "Hamid" 23 180 false
```

It's good for renderHook of application (controlling whole body of application).

**Note**: `super` looks like `base` and `extends` looks like `:` in C# programming language.
